Excerpts from the lost Move Smart Podcast 013 - Lewie West:

I think people skip those a lot trying to get to the more impressive tricks. They may say, ‘Oh I could do a forward roll now, so I’m going to go to the next progression and then the next until I could do a round off back salt.’ But all those simpler basic tricks have variations that are very interesting and challenging. There are some VERY difficult variations of a forward roll, which are VERY fun and you might miss out on if you go straight to the next thing. Play ‘horizontally’ with the basics there and get really good at them before building your vertical skill level.

Question to Lewie: Do you train vigorously? Or is it all just exploration and accumulation?
Lewie West: Because I’m constantly touring with the circus school, that doesn’t leave much extra energy for vigorous strength training and I have to be careful so I don’t do a lot of vigorous training. I do a lot of warming up, prehab/rehab and listening to my body and then going into the skill work and then after that I have to fit in my own training and I have to customize that because I have to be physically sound for the show. And that limits the amount of my strict strength training. But it’s a lot easier to work on the horizontal skill development because you already have the skills and you’re simply pulling them apart and putting them together so it’s a lot less muscle usage.

Question to Lewie: Can you expand on how you “listen to your body” and not injure yourself in a typical training session?
Lewie West: I start with a very good warm up with a little bit of stretching, theraband exercises, listening to my body. As I go through these things, I understand if I need to go easy today or if I feel like I have a lot of excess energy. And this varies a lot day by day. I would “scan” through my body and limber up. If my wrist is sore I’d do my wrist rehab. If I’m scared of rolling my ankles, I will give them some attention to make sure they’re switched on. Then, let’s say I wanna work on chinese pole that day, I would do some basics: like try out climbing the pole in a few ways, try some static holds. Then I would choose a certain kind of trick, like acrobatically entering the pole and hugging around the pole and trying many variations of that. Then moving onto handstand creative work around the base of the pole.

I also tend to not persevere with things if I feel it’s not being helpful. I often have a plan going into the training session: ‘I wanna try this and this and this.’  If my mind and body are working really well with tumbling that day, for example, and I’ve written down that I’m also gonna try handstand work, maybe I’ll just skip that handstand work and just keep tumbling because that’s working out really well that day.

Or vice versa: If I start tumbling and my body doesn’t feel good and it’s not responding the way I want it to that day, I’ll move onto something that’s different. So I’ll move onto handstands, cause that’s different. But if that feels dodgy too, then I’ll move onto juggling and that’s safe and I know I’m not going to hurt myself doing but I could still feel creative and push myself in new ways in that area.